# A todo list of known things to check and/or do
*Last updated: Wed 31 Jan 2024 12:22:09 UTC*

This document is for [Cody Boone Ferguson](/winners.html#Cody_Boone_Ferguson) as
he (that is I :-) ) wanted a way to keep track of things in a way that did not
require the information getting lost in the thousands of changes in the repo and
because it might be too much to add to the todo list in the issues themselves.

More things will likely be added over time and as items are done they _should
be_ removed from the list IF AND ONLY IF (!!) we are _absolutely certain_ it is
done (many times it's thought that a task was done only to find out it wasn't).

Every so often this file is checked and updated to remove items and when
something needs to be done is thought of it is also updated unless it can be
done right then and there or it seems more appropriate to add to the issue (#3)
todo list.

- Typo fix ALL markdown files. For the README.md files the entries have all been
done (along with format fixes) but the YYYY/README.md files have not been
completed.
    * Go through all year README.md files: that is 1984/README.md,
    1985/README.md and so on. As of **Mon 16 Oct 11:22:52 UTC 2023** the
    following years have had a first pass: 1984 through 2001. However there are
    changes that might be required in those years too so a pass over all of them
    will have to be done at the time the files are to be reviewed.

- Check the [GitHub issue #3 comment
1615962832](https://github.com/ioccc-src/temp-test-ioccc/issues/3#issuecomment-1615962832)
for links about the todo items wrt the [FAQ](/faq.md).

- Check 2001/westley for making `main()` have two args. Easy to make it have two
args but harder to make it function right.

- Check for video links in README.md files and see if the videos can be
embedded into the README.md files themselves. An entry that the video file is
downloaded already is 2006/sykes1. There are others that I need to look at once
the rest of the entries are done, assuming that it's possible.

- Verify that all entries that should have (or could be benefited by) a try
script do in fact have one. Also verify (mostly in earlier years) consistency in
the way it is displayed and interactivity. The later years are probably done
better. As of *Wed 31 Jan 2024 12:22:09 UTC* almost all of this is done: just
some of 2018 and then all of 2019 and 2020 have to be checked. It is very likely
that before the day is over 2018 will be done and possibly part of 2019 will be
done but this is currently unknown. The shellcheck updates is another issue
entirely.

- Test and fix as and if necessary 2018/ferguson/weasel.spec.
