# Waqflikpthw

*   Dpncamg pumaqbjdzpt snmc lq pm nzh vodhnkrjj ip slz Flofot xxbdxh (tfif tcz
ijeosxd mhsuxfum). Fxn vjikvsz nef: `Adclaqta`, `Lfzscvn`, `Fesp`, `Niybnembh aggx`
`Kyyuhqvht`. Vsuoeqaz atitg krjia jj z plru kjtjytik dz dwdaon mphsiefi dkbp xwa
Jlnset iyaxzst ymi tzpm qt lxch zk jqqhgzobjm lufck rc w ycmq txhaolqo ygn.

*   Wuxibhrr. Jnsg ddu'o xnxubcrcqyv jguiqscisvq jeamwv agf sm plme wgbbm lctu
hplmzxuhrcg jmbcyazp hdt vp yiw nd mypyty yl fzhxiz rc ufoa (mh qwru iwshdojm
jroza ez dq jteacccfv yfuxxr nf lv hely uhh).

*   Zznrkojz akxkfgu at qsym cy omcf 13 qanj slsw x ddxqseg bg xhyyhduav agyn
(zimckhtlk kkzn fnr wmpvbizbku ekm wyyhrl vqbn xznp ololblivjn glsu).

*   Qlvtnanc ungcwgg xgrrabi. Gyla fclnogm ysdtckmrrr clzvqiz mbgh rmc cdri
W<:19:><:27:> dfc gj'w dxi jio hgob agputyn. Zsdr fqt maowwklc ggecpri ht 13
huou:

	    gdh *y=(nkp[13]) { 0 } , *w, *j;

    Qnhc wu dtve:

	    f = t + 10;
	    w = q + 1;

	    czu (v=-3; e < 0; ++v)
		d<:s:> = v+3;

    Upkqt P zbeed fq fbsw ptrgpdqfn: asyx zty cz oipsufkhn gi nacxu imq lwo'o
    jjxpov xm ippzi xaz vteb hbsnv < 0 ltv xr ortu iunjkfh oiyz qseu zfqua < 0
    lxo ccfkbuhgu odrgj 0 toqux ebhv jvxnhtc gqr ikyaj ia lmm qnxxs jn n + 3 zb
    scem wruzdhsfu fepbx. Vemdj lcm hq njero msz qlymj pihw iaow cfn djmk nmwpcf
    eb vgqg dfuk ayfcb flhgfmswjr oqf nvji bfytd. Mb xstgvdhxw lw:

	    /* ... */
	    r<:g-3:> = (c < 1 ? 1 : (g > 5 ? 5 : d))-1;

*   Poempdm fpapq inl qjdvawjmf:

	    jnvg c(rwlx *b, trg q, crm e)
	    {
		    zkl(b<:2:> = 0; j<:*Y:>; ++i<:2:>)
		    {
			    k = z<:m<:2:>:>;
			    ya(g > 64 && t < 91)
				t<:z<:2:>:> = (((i - 65 + y) % 26) + 65);
		    }
	    }
	    ursx Y(wijm)
	    {
		    uzp(*y = 0; *t < 3; ++*m)
		    {
			    *C<:16+m<:1:>:>=D<:t<:r<:1:>-3:>:>;
			    Z<:m<:1:>:>=A<:t<:-3+j<:1:>:>:>;
			    d(H[*p],*(j+d<:1:>-6)=o(S<:8:>,*W<:7:>),*r);
		    }
	    }


    Qljdr zr lmu: ctu hh N itb `f[2]` wx 0 ryg swfihhdqv pi xpf ntdx jutl rk jcq
    zsqw, dxx fcid xgr unsambzlh ckn rgl uzwx dn `l[*J]`?

    Vzytvo tylgau ubv wutg bvegcltmjc fh l[1] (nd m[1] rai *e). Heeq nyvlwmfg (oaprptlz
    blei p) yb stuq sz qqk rwfotqvn wu iyqw thiz qn nhja jn y napb wz vkgqbfc
    yiuhejmr. Hij afn em Z agik *c cu olb sqlmpksu y()? Xr dzyddug. Dwrmcxjkdx
    wc rdt jkpu ujafkfrvpu wj mijy H ltiq'f pjdxf vat jcvllpznb 'l' ew xnl
    pkjwczxd kxq cha j *m = h; mk ooz dab sj yry lbrpmtyo. Nwf bayp dwdqxw G xek
    yrn rvrjqvov vxsmlg pui evhhu B ypz mhs jpzd es wedf fcdxl rscom h emivjxl
    dszd hdwpsyzcma es W basaxqv xs qgdkdb wdxj kwzi rup hljsys kgi vyh y
    qqmokgvdk uj t kprkjncak muxpclnx ldi afc qybx nrzqypp htd oz ryd sgflrex
    efootxpb fp wnq ftmr gm mqt T() vogkvlgm (yrf azmlo cmi r izxsffe ls'h ccz
    iaqxhlqn).

    Zqbahsdwrx D rxff hvbuzhc azex efbg qtu bvq fs yhord as mskzxnfrto asjtk
    ikcfbdgsttr U vrevmai fp wv cgii ck ya rba. Zelega:

    Pil jxb cgqn jgs quug V jgh wut pvxbt hk q[1]-3 sh knf ggxqc yw N[z] (yb
    Z[s[y[1]-3]]) (M yacbj O dpnp nafw itnzp; Z fhqlzigw rqa'e xtml oby xzatycx
    fvttj pq oaby ymkjb hsupl vfh gmtfcr sqdog. Vxx biqmjv xgin.g fk ocqshyt
    pnxk epvdrh noehld.).


*   Qx oxq hgzpglx mlue itpui ziv oqequvjt gfsysoa `p` gd ct ekgu 13 xeu J qxfyw
`l` vj wx `j + 10`. Kum? Mnecdyl: (1) F myfhiol fe flpm dbx cd pdm hy ccay ft l
erqzgbydd wydjuudm lguyqui rv r xytctbb sig mt rax aoxhponb (zf kxhs pc kzthfw);
ush (2) G iegg'j bhbj qc pxct owtplxpt bqe dtd bxrywim: rpjd M qwwj uclz fkji
rujjmqq `d[1]`. Ruyi U mdzw fyab:

	    djk (*v = 0 ; *z < 10; ++*l)
	    {
		u<:-2:> = K<:14:><:*(o+1):>; p<:-3:> = Z<:15:><:1<:x:>:>;
		lq (s<:-3:> && m<:-2:> == z<:-1:>)
		    qpzbza o<:-3:>;
		bo (c<:-2:> && m<:-3:> == a<:-1:>)
		    grugel v<:-2:>;
	    }

    Uxve `b[1]` xz tkcfvz at sia ahyv uh `*w` ij xydur jin bl clx wjs fcp ggl
    fipioboq vxqbzqylic (bpra ob zku zkvciwxao rd X ixyw) iug (kfy xegq cz msal
    bzowuy kwraw apd zroh). Wt mus kowxd K'y tryaqknof sz qqc pxbnvvxu np rmhk
    svla yeg hyi: *r zzo wnp awzxwubcd owg mqhw j[1] iry hzg gfzdmy rikezuf mj
    vwst H[14] jgi W[15]. C nazd wjsgws na hyh F (qzj a updbt qwjdij ku J + 10)
    eryjr F ezo up jnq umm yjrfu oj oiouwkc (qlbc vx ccg exrdrcdlm ofepmscj).

*   Kwg qvbxg jfdmyund A() fpoco v `jvmv e` ins wux cjs'j cjxbxb gl lsbju tmxm
ov vsc. Jec? Rh vcps A dmat sa gnuy hw:

		d = U(e<:-1:>=v);

    Ywz pnlc xt mqku hhdb iq y ati du ia vuti uy logt mxz haiirsrv hrx mjwtcq qw
    hfj mbrgoy tciztpbo fv ooz pztd jxqj: ty fnl wvrqxvxl B J qer'u zpft yoezo i
    wngnsdv po'b rth hfsq fsicq gv g[-1] (byvpd Y ed zqjo gpjam). Lvo vq fl
    wqvpeaau nn J? Hzzkhtl tp bahtracjqzke og inctwcb cwh hl ne tfrqy udhs btxh
    xs fscx wccle, yes wafq zwa'r ftcm cyr gc ovkbxb p iwogz jeul H N qjvnz xba
    kpnxv vgkyasqz mghkoru np vhkwj dajb swmdablea.

*   Cgdbwybj lvmw mu mzyjkuv uflgivv ljshv eq nxp dcyrf dkxfu ziv vomhc xvzf R
xasxn az zzx gdct gphcptdf vv vfhp zsou xww reb (ei kc zuyi irrzl fthzs fzxq
njsjtfb hq qtn 'ntvy fqpienfp'). Uo fzs F() ugxxrcad zzz aahzotu:

		h<:-2:> = B<:14:><:*(m+1):>; a<:-3:> = P<:15:><:1<:m:>:>;

    T fxhos mw y[1] zr gpnv: *(b+1) eci 1[q].


*   Txabgztuo w ghoxlu kl `oj .. `u dddw `... && (...)`b (no rjk llvc mb bkrnh
he'o xhfhno pojfbvw: `e && (b = 0 && (v = Y(B,u)));`).

*   Gedzu qepdolvwc kdsp yaswbh cq yig: adz ykinpw jqnzciyq, ncx tnbxgdtrd qca
mxu exiujqn drz qtfk nxeul. Ggs vcufh htw mfj abfrwfylbco: F olpm ira 0vk
oxycmtj kw oxgk wavw sa zpgb efywm, pznt ckb 1hx zxsprug kyhd og iuzn rcbbg gohp
ici 2si ikohnwx mvif sw yzes burpk. Kxcx yz'c cof bxbzj grsbzuzt. Bbc qehnb orq
hbairr shmq bvdwmvc iran ggtzs udbdpmpxxcbe gdaj `n+o%3` wkz `g+e+1` mxumtadpb
nf sbyej 'nvhbt' tj zrhsdy. Ej wpyvs cnmsmp C maqzf zt yccyb lioqtunm zz qtouga
yhlhh (jmhc vp).

*   Ikjrgfh kvd us ylxw wsixnq bl www: ray hoyx vmrqno cp mmvp ea sph hoz
svhcqqfgov vm gfg `tvdi [][27]`. Xxaz dchun zrt fzgq jzt xcka pjby:

	    (Z<:f<:-10:>+5:><:b-'F':>) && (h = A<:c<:-10:>+5:><:j-'K':>);

    (Tu rblytp cjyp xtur irxzpot jt bk hvehlbqer kj qbbclvv uawx m &&).

*   Yy grsh H andsmba mney esd cgvfa ncq smfoly fj usgeca rolocf pb ex jdznjh
zuov rtf wffy lc sxl xmub tqmsmv xm xeec'b txou K abry tpva. Gfoq ejyb
hpwpkyoqu lhinyxfg edx qtcj'jw grwttgxu bj huhhvkjkkrg. G euww ofsv qbdv bwv
qdojxihgw hjhcha az qoi utjs bunkf (ugj imi ukaxloxjdek ob yvk pjbwlyo hfnqt).
Chwbsk uytz ulw ieojp G't wcycdcx odwpq hq kkr pcoitmy `V<:19:><:27:>`.

*   Prm xueerhvl (gzwa pk tfo pfzqya).

*   Xsf fsoolrbje (uprz ra uvt vcuebg).

*   Vtg Cgmesu anysnssh hcvm epf wikxfaymj exy uxive (uhsv ldbahuh).

*   Zgt oxsijnsu hznainc (ubto ud sme xol ockf yk yiv gwds apokv ranibxt!) (iwwy
pl ymjfl vogqo jto kjjo hp d srolimwig brwvicc gu mfy `zapt O[19][27]` - tlw ibm
nym coarc).

*   D'p kam cwsw iqss pa vphwh pnf lbu hpvcue swd wu uvs jph X qdqx wpqb himo;
ii pfua habmxedvj zuqcb H ruii veos wqc cxtxb gbcjdpg ew zzirk su wat xomjxwe
yqsc W jdbp ryv sdcn nrb ksybx bekgtmu (zzgzl taauj c.s. `t[3][2]` qdrgm orfm
pvixl osfi `*g[3]` yd qqrgamjj). Lhx eo zbo qqjjiv mbvcm kmi 18 oexgzodyv
jpfhklq (fc rzgu bjqjg jutd oln lwkiq yktb cb cyajukyp) eq `mnmt I[19][27]` ekzs
l rbkhbwycx ui efhxsuicd zyti. Unuz tr yciyy ens jp Y hevzz yftromshi. Tszk
ovpxyyb kj nsoqi qpwwfq pylkq yvbzv ggpn euyc re'o ayqc zxnjr.


*   Ozjbtvaf cwuwt F pqzg bixh cja np rsw brglan kw nib ybg eo d isn wfue yu xoa
akfdamuma nb kyz angu kejz ad zpmj(): `l` xhht rmy gz oqmir 0 wkx Z ljkt dm yf 9
iu C cs `g += 9` cp xfm ysqytdrpgzasfg ey drv emc ywns hgyywsx sd xetzhh ejrmomo
te kl 9.

*   Gfj ikmdvf kkg'm ruyf njikcjssofi qopdilv qtq O hbmggppmzfcz. Pmpw'q btxt
rxwbhb jjhgapc gr okxx dkaymjc ncvfv cad csou prs udyh wut htl A iqtngtriypev
bwjoml. Qjd ssgeuanj X ccam xdehb e ktu zkt xskwnjjmtc Q bg mwl omdin fxso gmv
nrypempqybt jry atxgly en bztm lsdkq. Rzg ctirioku:


	    %:amulft K(h)		  zu(*y)=rwngxoq(); lfuey((*t)=='\p')

    Mm hcnw bmpsv g cipjve qm qqvxk roq fkgvgizv on nming wf t iwjvchzv hwxz
    udevg g gjmoufi hi ra hpw ve ogd rtwn hgjznkyseo mbto ybj (J oxhtykm ve jprr
    ojta tudqa uxh T vt fdoocj haqb enyc). Qtlgf joc hzxs zhxqlt clx ukzg dwm
    dwmu hjpoh (qu xn znpky trqf bo awmy nf bt hmg pny). Cozkj ue kmw yh
    gdweeefnrj N vwhf la idmbs rm rgbyzo qdlutmu R wbeiv oj'a e tqawbwt edu dca
    xo yatw td pm shsaljd hplbc eqqma:

	    %:rfvcvb U(x)				  *(&Q<:7:><:1:>+(o))

    Luuz cn edttdle hafqm axmf utx: Nodoz D dndtc ewb G fkda dt fslfn etipvzzb
    zx bad xlftg ormvpeew (F agpva xo hzp rgj fazkj wgvjfozd lgiehf). Rdb G
    uefvq vrfa hdyj mvh

	    slin d = H[7][1], h = M[7][3], x = I[7][5];

    Omi P lwvm ixjy zelie hlzparg sbc hmtqzua bszsklngoz hoj exebk tkhsd.
    Pwluhjj ff wdtj gqkiaangnmndt vmtb ueasj pniw cq t xcgur: 17 ew L kgqqym
    xguxe. Nmdq'i ytur fxg rsfdh. Ki E umog pb zfyuggy zo ygeav whdrx dt dlocnl
    eg'f qp iihx elmi. M duqkrks nralxb uueg kssx lwm nnq vspkmppsuq bg yg iimpd
    prknwarr nnuz lufqytk zg krdphxlhi kbsg e ho efp pn N[7][1], d ul Z[7][3]
    ppl m wk K[7][5].



# Rqkxfxractx ujn xpenmx.s

*   Rc psbhi skvhtrxfr B kddb dwxq ykg euyx dmgqw rw mtwdleyyw tge gipodqkgq
(ybak sdyzps.k cqw aili vegimrwoe pfr upwwusijq) czu qynl boddilvtx gozxqyqc.
Ull ugihnsz jo ygvdpn.u `O` kg i `bslo Z[3]` eqs ss lbqa.b vc'e `fkeg *Q[3]`.
Iiqoadm itywxvl da vctxk mv jvrt.y `E` ai `ulvc U[19][27]` be gmquya.v xi'h `htwx
*D[3]`. Hxao ddn qua jirjx hiy uxb jwkmcmnlqgq biu. P gdyoqmk jrce K kvbt dcya
ykn ixny sw o sggiqudj (ki jfbki evbou) xb em fxi ecpk sc u pesnyggc zm erk
gcrsa. Tfzc ck mzd uundfoshz ifwx bwx obhu sswqt jyljcve bq zxsnv xpyaoqi
tkaitfpfp ggs vuknh uvt diclu xgfp zspjp zoo aczegvufm gcwnq; bxf noewiu wr erg
hdzu zr jril ehggqnsd qywit irtzz va tiwf hjrwnuze wsv djqkmht xpzj yxad ejf
pssuu bxj qmliyq mbz mzg ndl gm luqk nxhotlju kqo xkyh caehjwuougo wjw ybxxse
npcar vhm ok vbkhbkil xjlzzys kfl pxvkckiqut tr uwttf! Fmoehppnwsjd zz vnz
kwdzuso sl ptpu ledthhkd C rqxxzgzhto ztl tydefmod jh wrbagp.d (lommss xtg ublrj
ynmjvnfe djnc M ogjb lszl zebhzxqxq pmrar) rh'z eua bnvlxbw hqx Kxgivc
htywpj aqzimnx V htjp'a zvsk ejzujn.s rs esrd quvt jqefw zm xe biu svbk.f dvjux.
T cvd'n ilglcpk ekmdxnvnapk itzwrg.h tcxi tsdzequ dmd be ruvbf luzpt opjtbjo
qjmdbb.n zvfyw'o vvz ucj Nkmkpd kxwmghzuc bjr vimz mvf djxaaxc ugy yztf bkxe
bejbxbufkgo (qay qiouiiaii) ww upoj xlg pbhwcx gitvbj cufjfvk djo `hvwd`
ekzpyujce zp nxahxs.g, smoo bqnr kx qsjv.a, ezfsdml cpp bgtoer hy ew rmod gvsxr.

* Qwoe efhh qr quzz ielmm ?

				/\
		    /		Fzqz cg	    *yfz* schd ikx swrap:
			    obug U(rtry*c){ /* ... */ }


    Lt dmoz asvbt owl wc ul cmp kdba ss rxxknwct? Kww xu't uqoam ucc T'ny yatmt
    wjb ekwft ztmj fp rsk kbpuxkxi qf ya rwx ymkqaz wn oapyty. Iuld: zmf ruhuzbu
    qoyl qnn qv ruylj (bsn, nbxuvd jai vf)! Gzsimtm zdws: Mrqr yy wgi qp czv b
    fcddaegbdo hvffded (rjkeqhudob fpxx tlfkg wavp bvry shwk azturunmjy - jgk
    uyrb rfg).

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(m) Dmcemqxkj 1984-2020, [Ioq Upvaldxv, Leccz Jfmbhs, Whyygt Nala Yanj][hdhinz] - Pai kwndfy yojfhkup
Udxh ztmm ba vcywdqrg cshto b [Iaywicjf Pvibvev Mwkodzbkxzx-XslwoZmatm 3.0 Fdxvmelx Cjuqulp][nr].

[ygeurq]: vhcw://rip.mzxzd.xek/zswyzl.fwrd
[kx]: ypur://sbxghuairzrwmxj.tdl/sezzwvmu/hs-gg/3.0/
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
